223
Tectonophysics, 204 (1992) 223-242
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam
Fault structure, wear mechanisms and rupture processes
in pseudotachylyte generation
Mark T. Swanson
Department of Geosciences, University of Southern Maine, Gorham, ME 04038, USA
(Received January 4, 1991; accepted 22 May, 1991)
ABSTRACT
Swanson, M.T., 1991. Fault structure, wear mechanisms and rupture processes in pseudotachylyte generation. In: J.F.
Magloughlin and J.G. Spray (Editors), Frictional Melting Processes and Products in Geological Materials. Tectono-
physics, 204 (spec. sect.): 223-242.
Fault-generated pseudotachylyte is found within both cataclastic and mylonitic host rocks suggesting that rapid
catastrophic displacements have occurred at a variety of depths within paleoseismogenic zones. Pseudotachylyte-bearing
fault zones represent a composite of structural features associated with the process of earthquake rupture propagation and
coseismic slip. The development of multiple pseudotachylyte veins in fault linkages, duplexes, sidewall ripouts, en echelon
arrays and brittle zones suggests repeated rupturing during a series of characteristic earthquakes. Each earthquake, as a
coseismic slip event, can be subdivided into initial rupture, acceleration, stable sliding and final deceleration stages. These
evolve through distinctive sequences of wear and deformation mechanisms that vary with sliding velocity, duration of slip,
total displacement and the hydrodynamics of the developing fault zone. Slip is thought to proceed toward surface
refinement and possible frictional melting following the propagation of leading shear fracture process zones. The passage of
the initial process zone of oblique fracturing would be followed by linkage to a throughgoing structure with asperity
reduction through brecciation, comminution and refined cataclastic flow for frictional melting in an abrasive wear-dominant
model. At greater depths in the presence of mylonitic anisotropy, slip would proceed through initial layer-parallel surfaces
and duplex linkages with rapid surface refinement through plastic smearing and laminar flow for frictional melting in an
adhesive wear-dominant model.
Introduction
Pseudotachylyte is a friction melt developed
during brittle faulting (Allen, 1979; Maddock,
1983; Grocott, 1981; Spray, 1987). The occur-
rence of pseudotachylyte within fault zones is
interpreted as the fossil remnant of paleoseismic
events (Sibson, 1975, 1989). Pseudotachylyte is
commonly found within inactive fault zones now
exhumed by erosion where brittle ruptures propa-
gated at depths within the crust approximating
the former seismogenic zone. The occurrence of
pseudotachylyte along particular faults suggests
that the associated fractures were related to dy-
Correspondence
to: M.T. Swanson, Department of Geo-
sciences, University of Southern Maine, 37 College Avenue
Gorham, ME 04038, USA.
0040-1951/92/$05.00
namic rupture propagation and slip during incre-
mental coseismic displacement. The process of
earthquake rupture propagation within the seis-
mogenic zone is inherently complex at all scales,
but a lack of adequate geologic data inhibits any
detailed investigations into the actual process of
rupture and slip (Scholz, 1990). The study of
pseudotachylyte-bearing
fault structures, how-
ever, can provide, by direct observation, a unique
view of the process of earthquake rupturing that
cannot be obtained through indirect seismic stud-
ies.
This paper will present some of the distinctive
fault structures associated with the occurrence of
pseudotachylyte in a strike-slip fault setting, based
on studies in southern Maine and previously pub-
lished literature, and make some speculations as
to the processes at work during earthquake rup-
0 1992 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved
224
M.7‘. SWANSOK
turing. The discussion of fault structure, wear
mechanisms and rupture processes in a single
paper will attempt to bridge the gap between the
field/microscopic observations of fault zones and
the theoretical/experimental
realm of fault me-
chanics. This will help to build a conceptual dy-
namic model for the generation of pseudotachy-
lyte and provide possible directions for further
research. An understanding of the sequence of
rupture processes involved in faulting from an
experimental approach (Cox and Scholz, 1988a,b;
Jiefan et al., 1990; Shimada and Cho, 1990) or
from a geologic perspective, as in this study, will
be invaluable in modelling source zones associ-
ated with dynamic earthquake rupturing.
depth range of the strike-slip seismogenic zone
for typical shallow continental crustal faults (Fig.
1).
The ductile mylonitic regime develops friction
melts that are reworked by continued plastic
shearing. These exposures display features of
concurrent brittle and plastic deformation (not
simply the reactivation of earlier ductile fault
structures), expressed as intermittent brittle rup-
turing within a background of continuous plastic
shearing. Pseudotachylytes
from the mylonitic
regime have been reported
from mylonitic
gneisses of the BarthClCmy Massif in the French
Pyrenees (Passchier, 1982, 19841, the Outer He-
brides Thrust of northwest Scotland (Sibson,
1980a), the Musgrave block in central Australia
(Wenk and Weiss, 1982) and from Late Paleozoic
mylonites of the southern coast of Maine (Swan-
son, 1988). Pseudotachylyte veins in these expo-
sures show evidence of plastic deformation along
with the adjoining host rock and the development
of internal foliations during shear. Flattened, re-
crystallized porphyroclasts and mineral aggre-
Fault rock associations
Pseudotachylyte can be found within formerly
active fault zones now exhumed by erosion. Re-
ported occurrences include both ductile mylonitic
as well as brittle cataclastic host-rock associa-
tions. These exposures effectively span the entire
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
FAULT ZONE
I
DEPTH
BULK
DEFORMATION
TEMP.
/
FAULT
OCCURRENCES
FEATURES
WEAR
PRODUCTS
200.
6
t
14
16
.____..._.
,.___,__
_..._ _.
_..,
_ __
MYLONITE
W*nk 8 Weirs (1962)
Sxonson (1968)
,-4d
Fig. 1. Profile
transition,
through
variation
a conceptual
of deformation
occurrences
strike-slip
seismogenic
and wear mechanisms
(some from non-strike-slip
with
mwolitic
mylonits
, uttromylon8le
zone, after Sibson (1983) and Scholz (1988), showing
with depth
sources)
in the crust, and the distribution
within both mylonitic
and cataclastic
of selected
fault zones.
the brittle-plastic
pseudotachylyte
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
225
GENERATION
gates are aligned parallel to these internal fab-
rics. Injection veins are flattened and rotated.
Sibson (1980a) suggests that these veins reflect
transient discontinuities in the ductile flow field.
The plastic deformation of pseudotachylyte injec-
tion veins in mylonite regimes offers evidence for
truly concurrent brittle-plastic deformation.
The brittle cataclastic regime develops friction
melts in conjunction with the active cataclasis of
the adjoining wall rocks. A close spatial and
temporal association of pseudotachylyte and the
development of cataclastic layers has been re-
ported from the Nason Terrane of Washington
(Magloughlin, 19891, the Hidaka metamorphic
belt in Japan (Toyoshima, 1990) and in associa-
tion with Late Paleozoic faults in coastal Maine
(Swanson, 1989b). The pseudotachylyte in these
exposures typically contains clasts of older cata-
clasite and itself occurs as clasts in younger cata-
clasite. Multiple melt-cataclasite cycles reported
by Magloughlin (1989, 1990, 1992) clearly estab-
lishes a relationship with cataclasis and related
processes of abrasive wear in the brittle deforma-
tion regime.
Pseudotachylyte can commonly develop due to
progressive strain hardening exhibited by many
fault zones during uplift and erosion, thereby
superimposing cataclastic features on earlier my-
lonitic ones (Hanmer, 1989). Single exposures
may exhibit a progression of structures formed
throughout the history of uplift and cooling from
the brittle-plastic transition with continual aseis-
mic plastic shearing through intermittent seismic
slip, to repetitive cataclastic rupturing in the brit-
tle deformation regime in the upper levels of the
former seismogenic zone.
Nature of the seismogenic
zone
The distribution of pseudotachylyte at the time
of its formation within a fault zone corresponds
to the seismogenic zone of the crust. Current
models for a typical strike-slip seismogenic zone
include the brittle-plastic transition in the crust
as playing a key role in the structure of the
seismogenic zone and in the development of
earthquake ruptures (Fig. 1). The early models of
Sibson (1983, 1989) proposed a basic crustal
framework of an upper frictional seismogenic sec-
tion dominated by faulting (or brittle behavior)
and a lower, generally aseismic section domi-
nated by plastic deformation. The boundary be-
tween the two sections is delineated by the transi-
tion from brittle to plastic deformation mecha-
nisms in quartz at about 300°C and 12 km depth
for an undisturbed geothermal gradient. Higher
heat flow and locally steeper geothermal gradi-
ents along faults would elevate this transition to
shallower levels in the crust Gibson, 1983; Scholz,
1990).
The extrapolation of the high-temperature flow
law for the lower crust to intersect the lower-tem-
perature pressure-dependent
linear friction law
in the upper crust is, however, an over-simplifica-
tion (Scholz, 1990). Variable responses to defor-
mation in polymineralic crustal rocks argue
against such a simple transition. Because of this,
Scholz (1988) introduced a broad transitional
“semi-brittle” zone to account for the variation in
deformation mechanisms of quartz and feldspar
in quartzo-feldspathic crustal rocks, which is not
fully-plastic until the feldspar transition tempera-
ture at about 450°C and 18 km depth. The bulk
rock will assume the properties of the dominant
mineral component and thus the brittle-plastic
transition is gradational over several kilometers.
This semi-brittle transition zone corresponds, ap-
proximately, to depths in the crust typical of the
greenschist facies.
The lower section of the seismogenic zone has
been described as an “alternating zone” (Scholz,
19881, with bulk semi-brittle flow that alternates
with coseismic dynamic slip, due to downward
rupture propagation. The association of pseudo-
tachylyte with mylonitic host rocks (Sibson, 1980a;
Passchier, 1982, 1984; Swanson, 1988) as an ex-
ample of this alternating zone suggests intermit-
tent rupture propagation into this quasi-plastic
mylonitic flow regime at depth (Sibson, 1980a;
Strehlau, 1986; Hobbs et al., 1986; Scholz, 1988).
It also clearly shows the slip- or strain-rate con-
trol on deformation and wear mechanisms that
develops in this domain during actual coseismic
slip as opposed to interseismic creep.
However, considerable bulk “ductile” defor-
mation also occurs in the upper crustal levels
22h
within rocks that typically deform by brittle fault-
ing. Such alternating deformation can be seen
associated with cataclastic faults where accompa-
nied by continual aseismic solution-assisted creep
(i.e. diffusive mass transfer; Knipe, 1989) in the
adjacent wall rock and by cataclastic flow within
developing cataclasites or through minor fault
arrays. Power and Tullis (1989), for example,
describe shallow, brittle faults that display evi-
dence for alternating coseismic cataclasis and
aseismic creep during slickenside development as
part of an on-going seismic cycle.
Friction and wear during slip
Friction during slip within the upper crust is
dependent on the dynamic adhesion of a popula-
tion of asperity contacts between the sliding sur-
faces (Rabinowicz, 1965; Bowden and Tabor,
1973; Scholz, 1990). Surface damage during slid-
ing results in wear due to the interlocking and
ploughing of asperities (Engelder, 1978). The lo-
calized high stresses at these asperities lead to
localized brittle fracturing (abrasive wear) and/or
plastic shearing (adhesive wear) with the possible
development of localized high temperatures lead-
ing to incipient frictional melting (Logan, 1990).
A large fraction of the energy expended during
sliding is expressed as frictional heating (En-
gelder, 1978). The deformational response of the
asperities as the mechanisms of wear during pro-
gressive surface refinement controls the frictional
resistance during slip. Surface refinement pro-
gresses with wear of contacting asperities, in-
creasing the real area of contact between the
sliding surfaces (Teufel and Logan, 1978).
An important change in the dominant wear
mechanisms operating during slip in a conceptual
strike-slip fault zone also occurs within the brit-
tle-plastic transition zone (Scholz, 1988, 19901,
from abrasive-dominant
wear above N 12 km
depth to adhesive-dominant wear below and ulti-
mately to continuous adhesion through fully-plas-
tic deformation at depths greater than - 18 km
(Fig. 1). The abrasive wear domain is character-
ized by brittle behavior and unstable frictional,
velocity-weakening slip with the fracturing of as-
perities, development of loose wear particles and
M. 1. SWANSON
the production of a cushion of cataclasite. The
adhesive wear domain is characterized by semi-
brittle behavior and stable frictional, velocity-
strengthening slip with plastic deformation of as-
perities and material transfer to opposing sur-
faces during slip. This surface refinement during
slip produces a deformed layer of processed as-
perities that may, ultimately, lead to shear heat-
ing and frictional melting as the surfaces evolve.
Frictional melting can be an effective mechanism
of surface refinement that rapidly leads to a
maximum real area of contact by the melting and
redistribution of asperities during slip.
The generation of pseudotachylyte
by fric-
tional melting is, therefore, a wear mechanism
related to the evolution of frictional shear resis-
tance during coseismic slip. The amount of heat
generated during faulting is also dependent on
the sliding velocity and slip duration, as well as
the confining pressure and the availability of flu-
ids, since these affect the normal stress on the
fault during sliding. The frictional properties of
fault surfaces must change dramatically through-
out each slip event as the surfaces evolve. Fric-
tion will vary from static to lower dynamic values
upon development of a throughgoing surface, and
may drop suddenly due to melting and thermal
pressurization of the fault zone. These expected
variations in friction can, in turn, be correlated
with sequences of wear and deformation mecha-
nisms that develop during dynamic rupture prop-
agation. The detailed nature of such a rupture
event may be deciphered through the examina-
tion of structures bearing evidence of frictional
melting.
Typical features associated with pseudotachylyte
Many studies of pseudotachylyte occurrences
have focused on friction melts where preserved in
structural reservoirs. The sites of generation,
however, are commonly along narrow seams that
represent the actual asperity contacts during slip.
Both the reservoir structures and generating sur-
faces are created during the coseismic slip event
when the rupture processes that initiate slip
eventually lead to frictional melting. Clues to the
nature of these rupture processes are preserved
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
221
GENERATION
in the fault-fracture
structures associated
pseudotachylyte, and in the microstructures
textures of the former melt itself.
refinement that leads to melting. Wall rocks are
“flash” melted and, in some cases, superheated
during shear. Peak melt temperatures have been
estimated to be in excess of N 1000°C by Sibson
(1975) and Maddock (1983) based on host-rock
melt relations and over 1520°C by Wenk and
Weiss (1982) based on SiO, glass compositions.
McKenzie and Brune (1972) hypothesized that
temperature increases of over 1000°C could be
reached during geologic faulting. Experimental
results on a friction welding machine by Spray
(1987) show this to be a rapid and catastrophic
process with intense incandescence of the wall
rocks during flash melting and estimated temper-
atures of - 1400°C. Maximum temperatures
achieved during frictional sliding at sandstone
asperities, using thermal dyes, was found to be
N 1180°C (Tuefel and Logan, 1978)
Melt lifetimes may range from microseconds to
several minutes (or hours to days) depending on
slip velocity, slip duration and reservoir dimen-
sions Gibson, 1975) because these parameters
affect the total heat generation and the rate of
conductive heat loss to the adjacent wall rocks.
with
and
Conditions during frictional melting
Friction melts begin to develop sometime dur-
ing each slip event, given sufficient slip velocity
and duration and, once produced, typically sur-
vive as melt through the duration of slip. The
final cooling and solidification of the friction melt,
combined with any subsequent alteration or de-
formation, are responsible for the overall matrix
textures and microstructures in the pseudotachy-
lyte. Due to the nature of frictional heating that
produces pseudotachylyte, each slip event is asso-
ciated with a transient coseismic thermal pulse in
the immediately adjacent wall rocks (Scholz,
1990). A time/temperature
plot for an idealized
coseismic thermal spike can be used to model the
evolution of the friction melt and its solidification
to pseudotachylyte (Fig. 2). This evolution begins
with an early frictional heating stage associated
with the processing of asperities during surface
I+- r~~$C;fn+
-I_
friction
melt
-I+--
pseudotachylyte
-
Isoo*-
-
TEMP.
PC)
lOoo---
Fig. 2. Time/temperature
curve for a hypothetical transient coseismic thermal spike associated with frictional melting and the
production of pseudotachylyte. Various features of the surviving pseudotachylyte can be attributed to different stages in the
temporal development of the friction melt and its solidification.
22x
M.-I‘. SWANSON
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
melt solidifies during post-seismic quies-
cence, but contains remnant features related to
processes associated with the immediately pre-
ceding slip event. While glassy veins and chill
margins suggest rapid solidification, microlitic
textures indicate sufficient time was available for
slow, static crystallization. There is evidence in
some examples for assimilation of fragmented
wall rock during the melt phase with the develop-
ment of haloes (Swanson, 1988; Maddock, 1983)
and rounding of wall rock xenoliths (Sibson, 19751,
as well as vapor exsolution in vesicles (Maddock
et al., 1987). Geochemical studies suggest a direct
melting source (Maddock, 1986, 1990), mixing of
multiple parent lithologies (Magloughlin, 1989)
and a preferential progressive melting sequence
of hydrated mafic minerals followed by feldspar
and quartz (Maddock, 1990). Selective melting
may be indicated by a lack of mafic minerals as
xenocrysts in the pseudotachylyte. Ragged fault
vein contacts on the micro-scale may also result
from preferential melting of mafic minerals in the
adjacent wall rock (Spray, 1992-this issue).
The energy dissipation levels expected during
seismic faulting as investigated by Moore and
Sibson (1978) and Sibson (198Ob), can lead to
extensive thermal fragmentation of the wall rocks
accompanying frictional melting. Fragmentation
of the wall rocks and thermal spalling of the
xenoliths would also facilitate assimilation. This
may be a significant source of mineral and wall
rock clasts in some pseudotachylyte. This process
may also produce anomalously thick pseudotachy-
lyte veins charged with clasts in varying states of
assimilation.
Flow features commonly found within pseudo-
tachylyte can be attributed to simple shear flow
during displacement of the wall rocks along fault
The
229
GENERATION
and injection flow between walls of exten-
sion fractures into dilational injection vein reser-
voirs. Deformed amygdales reported by Maddock
et al. (1987) for certain Greenland pseudotachy-
lyte were interpreted in terms of shear flow in a
highly viscous cooling melt. Fault vein structures
produced by viscous shear in the cooling friction
melt could have potential as kinematic indicators
of the sense of slip.
Deciphering the ambient and transient condi-
tions during the slip event in terms of confining
pressure, temperature,
slip velocity, dynamic
shear strength and particularly depth are more
problematic. Glassy pseudotachylyte may be dom-
inant above 5 km (Allen, 1979). The presence and
mineralogy of vesicles and amygdales, represent-
ing the exsolution of a vapor phase from the
melts under low lithostatic pressures, have also
been used to infer a shallow (1.6 km) depth of
faulting for the production of the Greenland
pseudotachylytes (Maddock et al., 1987). Highly
vesiculated pseudotachylyte has been found in
the surface environment associated with land-
slides (Masch et al., 1985; Masch, 1990). Crys-
talline pseudotachylyte with microlitic textures
appears to develop at deeper crustal levels (Sib-
son, 1975; Maddock, 1983). The association of
plastically-deformed pseudotachylyte in mylonitic
zones also indicates much deeper crustal levels
(lo-15 km) and higher ambient temperatures
(300-450°C). Evidence suggests, then, that fric-
tional melting can occur at all crustal depths
within the seismogenic zone (Fig. 1).
W&S
Fault structures and associated dilatant reservoirs
Pseudotachylyte-bearing
faults and associated
vein arrays represent the development of genera-
Fig. 3. Pseudotachylyte from the Fort Foster Brittle Zone, southern Maine: (a) full thin-section photomicrograph (4 cm across) of
multiple fault-parallel pseudotachylyte veins developed along mylonitic layering. Note the millimetre-wide generation zones,
internal faulting, vein injections and older vein at top showing both ductile and brittle deformation effects; (b) outcrop photo (8 cm
across) of coupled rupture surfaces showing a pseudotachylyte matrix to a localized fault breccia; Cc) layer-parallel fault vein in
upper part of photo (40 cm across) truncates rotated fault blocks in lower part of photo, suggesting considerable wear at the sliding
contact; (d) outcrop photo (12 cm across) of layer-parallel fault vein and lateral injection vein showing internal flow layering and
brittle offsets related to subsequent rupture events.
230
tion-surface/reservoir-structure
systems during
successive earthquake events (Figs. 3 and 4). The
resulting fault vein and injection vein assem-
blages offer insight into the role of dynamic rup-
ture propagation in fault zone evolution.
Fault vein and injection vein arrays
Pseudotachylyte is most commonly found in
fault veins and injection veins (Figs. 3a,d and 4a)
as initially recognized by Sibson (1975). The fault
veins are typically a few millimeters to a few
centimeters in thickness and may show variations
in thickness related to irregularities in the fault
surface. Injection veins of pseudotachylyte (Figs.
3a,d and 4a) are the most common reservoir for
generated melts. Such veins typically lead the
melt away from any generating surfaces into the
cooler wall rocks. Injection veins may reach sev-
eral centimetres in thickness and several meters
in length. A high-angle or near-orthogonal rela-
tionship to the associated fault veins is common.
The type II vein classification of Magloughlin
(1989) incorporated isolated fault veins with asso-
ciated lateral injection veins and classified vari-
ous fault vein types into systems that show pro-
gressions toward multiple coupled arrays. Sibson
(1975) attempted to quantify the vein thickness-
fault displacement relationship for single-jerk
faults in the Outer Hebrides Thrust. Field mea-
surements show a linear relationship with vein
thicknesses proportional to displacement.
Pseudotachtylyte generation zones
Distinctive structures associated with pseudo-
tachylyte include paired slip surfaces that isolate
tabular zones of host rock (Figs. 3a,b and 4b),
first recognized in the brittle zones of the Ikertoq
belt in west Greenland (Grocott, 1981). These
distinctive parallel fault configurations, called
pseudotachylyte generation zones, are defined by
pairs of overlapping layer-parallel slip surfaces
that serve as the dominant displacement struc-
tures. The fault-bounded
slabs between these
overlapping surfaces commonly exhibit a complex
strain history. Internal fracture assemblages con-
sisting of orthogonal dilatant veins and conjugate
shear fractures indicate fault-parallel extension
associated with the injection of pseudotachylyte.
M.T.
b.
pseudotachylyte
C.
en echelon
generatmn
lmkoge
-
SWANSON
zone
duplex
-
-
v
d.
sidewall
ripout
-1
.
tm
Fig. 4. Fault structures associated with pseudotachylyte gener-
ation: (a) fault vein/injection vein systems; (b) paired shear
systems of pseudotachylyte generation zones (after Grocott,
1981); (c) en echelon linkage duplex in typical extensional
geometry (Swanson, 1988); (d) sidewall ripouts with leading
and trailing structural assemblages (Swanson, 1989b).
A variety of vein arrays have been described by
previous workers (Sibson, 1975; Park, 19611, many
of which have two parallel bounding fault veins in
the array. The type III veins of Magloughlin
(1989) also resemble the paired shears of Grocott
(1980, while the ladderworks and pull-aparts of
Sibson (1975) are similar except that there is less
overlap between fault surfaces.
Strike-slip slab duplexes
Detailed mapping of tabular structures in my-
lonitic exposures of the Fort Foster Brittle Zone
of southern Maine (Fig. 4c) has shown these
paired structures to be elongate areas of exten-
sive overlap between the ends of en echelon
strike-slip fault segments (Swanson, 1988). Inter-
nal deformation within the tabular zones, by con-
jugate faulting between overlapping generating
slip surfaces, serves as the mechanism of dis-
placement transfer and finite strain accommoda-
tion between the coupled fault segments during
slip. This style of deformation and fault linkage
creates distinctive pseudotachylyte-bearing,
slab-
shaped, strike-slip duplexes, particularly in highly
anisotropic rock. Extensional and contractional
geometries of internal fracturing within the
fault-bounded slabs depend on the sense of slip
and stepping direction between the overlapping
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
231
GENERATION
Sidewall r&outs
Similar structures associated with pseudo-
tachylyte in both the mylonitic and cataclastic
fault zones of southern Maine as well as in west-
ern Greenland (Fig. 4d) consist of coupled exten-
sional and contractional ramps (Swanson, 1989b)
that define tabular to plano-convex fault lenses
adjacent to the dominant slip surfaces. These
structures, termed “sidewall ripouts”, are inter-
preted to be mesoscale examples of adhesive wear
that were generated as tabular ripouts up to 35 m
or more in length during slip along the main
fault. Adhesion of the fault blocks during slip
ruptures the adjoining fault wall, ripping out a
slab of host rock and translating it along during
displacement. This ripout lens, at least temporar-
ily, acts as an asperity (Scholz and Engelder,
1976), plowing its way through the adjoining wall
rock along the leading contractional ramp until
the cessation of slip or it is sheared off during
continued displacement. Translational plowing
causes distortion of the fault surfaces at the lead-
ing ramp and creates an extensional reservoir at
the trailing ramp for pseudotachyl~e
produced
along the dominant slip surfaces. The intersec-
tion of the extensional splay faults with the prin-
cipal slip surfaces creates a local structural reser-
voir due to rotated-block movement along these
listric trailing ramp surfaces. With significant dis-
placements, tapered zones of pseudotachylyte-
matrix breccias develop in the ripout tails as
described from Greenland
(Swanson, 1989b).
Similar melt-dominant zones with a plano-convex
geometry and showing a high degree of assimila-
tion, described by Magloughlin (1989), may have
a similar origin. Piano-convex sidewall ripouts
(Swanson, 1989b) are similar to wear features
found in metals (Rabinowicz, 1965; Rowden and
Tabor, 1973). Since adhesive wear depends on
the slip velocity and slip surface refinement be-
tween the slipping surfaces, sidewall ripouts most
o en echelon
b. 
fault segments. Contractional duplexes tend to
thicken with displacement through internal imbri-
cation. Extensional duplexes with severe listric
fault rotations (Fig. 3c) may thin catastrophically
and lead to the formation of breccia with pseudo-
tachylyte matrix (Fig. 3b).
complex
orroys
brittle
zones
lOom
Fig. 5. Structural settings associated with pseudotachylyte
fault veins: (a) shear bands and en echelon R-shear arrays as
precursors to through-going fault zone develoment; (b) com-
plex brittle zones of repeated layer-parallel ruptures.
likely develop during the later stages of each
associated slip event as the velocity and real area
of contact along the fault increase.
multiple fault uein arrays
Several occurrences of multiple pseudotachy-
lyte fault vein arrays are found in distinctive
structural settings when viewed at a larger scale
(Fig. 5). These multiple vein arrays show evidence
for repeated rupturing with identical fault styles
and deformation
mechanisms for successive
earthquake events.
En echelon arrays
Evidence for intermittent coseismic slip is ap-
parent within some shear systems that have
evolved as R-shear, en echelon arrays. These may
occur as mesoscale shear-bands in a zone of
distributed regional fabric (Fig. 5a). Individual
shear elements occur as oblique slip surfaces or
fault zones that develop localized pseudotachy-
lyte which, therefore, must be coseismic. These
oblique slip surfaces are subject to re-orientation
during continued shearing toward lower angles
relative to the shear direction. Passchier (1982)
describes oblique pseudotachylyte fault veins that,
with continued plastic deformation, evolved into
lower-angle ultramylonite shear bands. Swanson
(1989~) has described oblique cataclastic fault
232
M.T. SWANSON
zones with minor pseudotachylyte in an en eche-
lon R-shear array on the kilometer-scale in asso-
ciation with centimeter-scale shear band fabrics
in the host lithologies. Pseudotachylyte is locally
developed in linking P-shear ramps between seg-
ments. With the continua1 accumulation of finite
strain, the development of these mesoscale shear
bands and en echelon arrays may be a precursor
to the evolution of a larger-scale, throughgoing
fault structure. Large-scale en echelon arrays that
evolve with reorientation to lower angles relative
to the shear direction may lead to the formation
of complex brittle zones described below.
were called “brittle zones” (Grocott, 1981; Swan-
son, 1988). The Fort Foster Brittle Zone in south-
ern Maine consists of hundreds of rupture sur-
faces in a 60-m-wide zone of intense fracturing.
The brittle zone itself appears to have a paired
shear or duplex structure, with slip localization
occurring along the outer boundary zones.
The repeated rupturing apparent in these brit-
tle zones suggests a history of paleoseismic activ-
ity. The structural similarity of these repeated
ruptures is due to the strong structural control of
the host rock anisotropy and a consistent style of
fault segment linkage. This provides a clear struc-
tural mechanism for the Schwartz and Copper-
smith (1984) mode1 for the evolution of so-called
“characteristic earthquakes”.
Brittle zones
Pseudotachylyte veins are commonly found in
well-defined zones of intense shear fracturing up
to several hundred meters in width and particu-
larly within anisotropic host rock (Fig. 5b). Zones
of pseudotachylyte-bearing
brittle fractures in the
Ikertoq belt of west Greenland (Grocott, 1981)
occur as complex, sub-parallel, overlapping arrays
up to 100 km in length. These complex arrays of
multitudes of fault-parallel pseudotachylyte veins
Rupture model
Rupture at a point
Each coseismic slip event is typically recorded
on strong motion accelerometers
as a sudden
ground acceleration to coseismic slip velocities, of
I
I
I
?
S
r
G
E
y
1 COSEISMIC
I SLIP
I 
I 
I
I
I
POST - SE I SM IC
I
I
I
2
zi
6
T
(m.)
TIME
(sec.)
initial rupture - acceleration - maximum slip vetocity - deceleration -qubcence
I---
frictional
I-
heating
duration
-
of melt
Fig. 6. Rupture model for coseismic slip at any particular point on a slip plane, depicted on hypothetical displacement versus time
curve showing processes associated with initial rupture, linkage, acceleration, maximum slip velocity, deceleration and post-seismic
quiescence.
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
233
GENERATION
Acceleration
involves the propagation
and
linkage of an initial fracture array resulting in the
clearing of asperities and surface refinement fa-
cilitating unrestrained slip. The maximum slip
velocity stage follows after surface refinement
through various wear mechanisms. Given suffi-
cient displacement, velocity and slip duration
along these surfaces, frictional heating may lead
to pseudotachylyte generation. Deceleration and
post-slip quiescence would be associated with the
injection, cooling and solidification of the friction
melt. This succession of stages also corresponds
to a progression of wear and deformation mecha-
nisms that develop along the fault surface during
the accumulation of displacement and the build-
up and dissipation of frictional heat.
Shear heating that leads to partial or complete
melting could produce a dramatic reduction in
dynamic shear strength (Jaeger, 1942; McKenzie
and Brune, 1972; Cardwell et al., 1978; Sibson,
1980a). Melt production may result in accelera-
tion of slip due to wall rock lubrication and
thermal pressurization of the fault by the melt.
Melt pressures result from expansion of the host
rock upon melting (e.g. up to 12% volume for
rocks of tonalitic compositions, as reported by
the order of several meters per second, followed
by deceleration until the fault blocks are again at
rest (Sibson, 1989; Scholz, 1990). On a local scale,
the actual rupture and displacement processes
associated with coseismic slip and earthquake
generation are complex, with deformation and
wear mechanisms being dependent on pressure
and temperature (Scholz, 1988) and strongly in-
fluenced by slip velocity (Rabinowicz, 1965; Shi-
mamoto, 1989; Spray, 1989). Deformation and
wear mechanisms at any crustal level will, there-
fore, vary continuously with the evolution of slip
velocity and frictional resistance during each co-
seismic event.
Stages in the development of coseismic slip
An instructive view of the coseismic slip event
is the corresponding displacement versus time
plot where the slope reflects slip velocity and
changes in slope reflect acceleration and deceler-
ation (Fig. 6). Each slip event can be subdivided,
at least hypothetically, into an initial acceleration
stage leading to a maximum slip velocity, fol-
lowed by a deceleration stage until the cessation
of slip. Total slip duration for each event may be
only a few seconds.
a.
I
\/
t-
locked
fault
foilure
us
envelope
:::: +++++++::
b
/
b
1
\
1
\
_S’gtch
-
+
c.
-
1,
friction
melt
Y
t
1
d.
+
“r
I
orthogonal
injection
-
-
t
Fig. 7. Mohr diagram showing the generation of an orthogonal injection of melt during slip: (a) gradual increase in differential
stress on locked fault zone; (b) failure through shear fracture propagation along fault; (c) coseismic stress drop to residual
differential stress during unrestrained slip; Cd) rapid decrease in effective normal stress upon generation of friction melt with
associated hydraulic fracturing and orthogonal melt injection.
234
Maddock et al., 1987). High transient dynamic
melt pressures on the order of 3 GPa may be
responsible for the formation of a high P-T Al-
rich pyroxene found in some Australian pseudo-
tachylytes according to Wenk and Weiss (1982).
Orthogonal injection veins of pseudotachylyte
projecting off of the dominant fault veins suggest
lateral wall rock injection of pseudotachylyte that
can be attributed to hydraulic fracturing related
to these high transient melt pressures (Fig. 7).
The orthogonal geometries reflect a drop in shear
stress on the dominant slip surface (Fig. 7) associ-
ated with thermal pressurization and melt lubri-
cation during slip as the friction melt layer is
generated (Maddock et al., 1987; Sibson, 1973).
Extensive melt lubrication and pressurization
along fault segments could modify slip velocity
and acceleration, promoting high seismic effi-
ciency and high dynamic stress drops (Sibson,
1973, 19771, thus driving rupture propagation to
its farthest extent. Scholz (19901, however, points
out that any silicate melts would have high vis-
cosities because coseismic flash melting leaves
little time for water to enter the melt. The result-
ing melt layer may then exhibit some shear
strength, reducing the effects of melt lubrication.
Preferential melting of hydrated mafic phases
(Maddock, 19901, on the other hand, may concen-
trate water in early friction melts thus reducing
viscosities. However, melt lubrication may tend to
occur in localized patches at evolving asperity
contacts, so that its role in reducing the effective
dynamic strength over the entire fault plane may
be limited (Scholz, 1990).
The lubricating effect of the melt and the
pressurization of the fault zone will ensure low
effective normal stress and low frictional shear
resistance. This would, at least locally, dramati-
cally decrease the frictional heat production at
the generating sites during slip and allow the melt
to begin to cool. The melt layer may then experi-
ence localized increases in viscosity and increas-
ing frictional resistance during slip which to-
gether act as a possible source of intermittent
adhesion. Significant viscosity changes during
longer slip events could lead to cyclic rupturing
during single events. This may be similar to suc-
cessive melting-freezing
cycles associated with
M.T.
SWANSON
power oscillations observed in the frictional melt-
ing experiments by Spray (1987). Multiple vein-
parallel layering could be caused by multiple ac-
celeration pulses during slip, perhaps related to
melt production and evolution. Lateral wall rock
injection of the melt as seen in outcrop would
also cause a sudden loss of fluid pressure and its
associated lubricating effects. This rapid loss of
lubrication could then lead to localized adhesion,
seizure of the fault blocks during slip and the
development of the sidewall ripouts described
above.
The commonly undeformed nature of most
pseudotachylyte
suggests that once produced,
friction melts survive as a liquid throughout the
deceleration stage until the cessation of slip and,
upon cooling, statically weld the fault surfaces
together. This appears to be an efficient strain-
hardening process in that most pseudotachylyte
fault veins are preserved intact with few that can
be shown to have re-ruptured during subsequent
slip events. Subsequent slip events rupture re-
peatedly through intact anisotropic host rock and
create a collage of layer-parallel pseudotachylyte
veins as seen in the brittle zones described above.
Each displacement increment, therefore, is
likely to proceed through an initial, unstable fric-
tional stage of acceleration with rupture, linkage
and decoupling, to a maximum slip rate stage
with the development of cataclastic and/or plas-
tic flow, frictional heat production with pseudo-
tachylyte generation, melt lubrication and ther-
mal pressurization of the fault zone. This is fol-
lowed by a deceleration stage and the develop-
ment of late mesoscale adhesive wear features,
then final post-slip quiescence and the solidifica-
tion of pseudotachylyte veins.
The role of fluids
The presence of hydrous fluids within fault
zones during slip can play an important role in
controlling the dynamic shear strength and can
buffer the production of friction melts (Sibson,
1973; Lachenbruch, 1980; Mase and Smith, 1985,
1987). Thermal pressurization of the fault zone
due to fluids depends on the hydraulic character-
istics of the host rock and the fault zone, the
coefficient of friction, the slip velocity and the
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE.
235
GENERATION
confining pressure. Theoretical work by Mase
and Smith (1987) suggests that friction melting
may still be possible in the presence of pore
fluids providing that the permeability exceeds
lo-l5 m-’ with a coefficient of friction greater
than 0.1 and slip velocities greater than 1 cm s-l.
This will allow frictional melting to occur before
thermal pressurization of the fault zone (Mase
and Smith, 1985). Given a low enough permeabil-
ity, thermal fluid expansion, be it melt or water,
due to frictional heating may lead to pressuriza-
tion and rapid drops in the dynamic shear
strength. However, an increase in permeability
upon fault zone evolution could halt pressuriza-
tion and cause a return to higher dynamic shear
strengths (Mase and Smith, 19%).
,
t
L
_-
.---
I
MODE111
0
“-
c ---_
-.
propagating
rupture
front,
/
__ _ _ _
-_
_c
MODEII
____/,
jr
-,
prwess zone,
A dy~a~‘~ rupture model
The 1979 Imperial Valley earthquake
A useful dynamic model for earthquake rup-
ture comes from the modelling studies of Archu-
leta (1984) and Quin (1990) for the 1979 Imperial
Valley earthquake in California. This M = 6.4
earthquake was recorded on a collection of near-
field strong motion accelerometers that allowed
analysis of the propagation along the entire rup-
ture length. These studies. showed that the quake
involved a 35-km rupture length with unidirec-
tional propagation and maximum strike-slip dis-
placements of 0.4 m. Strike-slip velocities ranged
to 1 m s-l, accompanied by abrupt accelerations
and decelerations along the length of the rupture.
~opagat~ng rupture front
The initiation of slip along a fault occurs pro-
gressively along a propagating rupture front. This
is the point at which the adjacent fault blocks
begin their acceleration to m~mum slip veloci-
ties. The passage of this rupture front coincides
with the development of initial rupture, linkage
and throughgoing fault formation at any particu-
Iar point. For the Imperial Valley event, average
rupture velocity along the length of the fault was
u 3 km s-l. Maximum rupture velocities reached
9.8 km s-l. The details of rupture initiation,
linkage and acceleration may, theoretically, set
Fig. 8. Dist~bution of Mode II and Mode III rupture propa-
gation and associated shear fracture process zones within a
developing slip plane. For upper crustal levels dominated by
cataclasis, faults evolve through a Mode III oblique en eche-
lon process zone. At lower crustai levels in the mylonitic
regime, faults evoive rapidIy through an anisotropy~ntrolled
Mode II shear fracture process zone.
the stage for eventual frictional melting during
peak slip velocities.
Experimental studies of slip nucleation by
Ohnaka and Kuwahara (1990) depict the rupture
front to proceed from a nucleation phase of
quasi-static, steady crack growth, to stable but
accelerating crack growth at N 50 cm s-l, to a
critical length at which unstable dynamic rupture
develops at l-3 km s-t. Stable crack growth
during the breakdown process leads to transition
and secondary rapid accelerations during unsta-
ble dynamic rupture propagation. Slip will only
occur after local breakdown is completed. This
creates a leading shear fracture “process zone”
developed at the tip of the propagating rupture
(Fig. 8). Deformation within the leading shear
fracture process zone may correspond to the early
stable fracturing under static friction conditions
236
M.T. SWANSON
which leads to the transition to dynamic friction,
linkage and unstable crack propagation. The
transition from static to dynamic friction condi-
tions occurs within the hypothesized critical slip
distance which determines the dimensions of the
leading process zone (Scholz, 1990).
Recent experimental work by Cox and Scholz
(1988a,b) on shear fracture propagation and the
associated process zone, points to a clear distinc-
tion between the style of shear fracture growth in
Mode II and Mode III configurations (Fig. 8).
Mode III propagation develops an oblique, en
echelon array of tension cracks that precedes
faulting (similar to the microscopic feather frac-
tures of Friedman and Logan, 19701, while Mode
II propagation is typically arrested by the growth
of Mode I tension cracks. Mode II ruptures were
found to only propagate under the influence of
pre-existing anisotropy, as has been demonstrated
by Laqueche et al. (1986) for slates. Mode II
rupture propagation may be facilitated in the
deeper parts of the fault zone under the influ-
ence of strain-induced anisotropy, such as anasto-
mosing fault surfaces or a mylonitic foliation,
thus promoting in-plane shear fracture propaga-
tion.
The development of an array of oblique Mode
I tension fractures associated with Mode III shear
fracture propagation leads to high initial wear
rates and contributes to the formation of catacla-
I
cataclastic
,
,
flow
I
,
site (Cox and Scholz, 1988b). A similar mecha-
nism for the development of cataclasite that pro-
ceeds through forward grain rotation and com-
minution has been proposed by Engelder (1974).
This may be an effective mechanism at shallow
crustal levels, but at deeper levels and higher
confining pressures the dominant process zone
mechanism would be oblique en echelon R-shear
fracturing, as is commonly present in natural ex-
amples. At even deeper levels and in the pres-
ence of a pre-existing mylonitic anisotropy, over-
lapping sub-parallel Y-shears may be the domi-
nant process zone mechanism (Swanson, 1989a).
Given the geometry of propagating rupture
planes in a typical strike-slip setting, growth of
the rupture surface will necessarily involve both
modes of shear fracture propagation as illus-
trated in Figure 8. At near-focal depths in the
seismogenic zone, the rupture plane propagates
in the same direction as the slip vector as Mode
II propagation. Mode II shear fracture propaga-
tion will be enhanced due to the prominent my-
lonitic foliation in the lower depths of the fault
zone. At upper levels of the seismogenic zone
above the focal depth, the rupture plane propa-
gates upwards and perpendicular
(or at least
highly oblique) to the slip vector as Mode III
propagation. This change in propagation mode
with depth may also be reflected in the variation
in the style of structural duplexing from lens to
surface refinement
I
I
I
I
I
I
1
R-R’
shear froctura array
\
(
!
Fig. 9. Profile of the propagating rupture tip, the associated shear fracture process zone and stages in the development of coseismic
slip.
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
GENERATION
237
long tabular overlap zones between fault seg-
ments in the presence of a mylonitic anisotropy
(Swanson, 1989a).
Rupture tip profile
Rupture and slip can be examined from a
more structural perspective with a telescoped view
of a propagating rupture tip on the outer edge of
the migrating slip patch associated with each co-
seismic slip event (Fig. 9). The propagating rup-
ture tip develops as an advancing shear fracture
process zone, perhaps associated with initial rup-
turing along an en echelon R-shear fracture array
or oblique tension fracture array. A similar view
of the shear fracture process zone and associated
rupture tip has been presented by Cox and Scholz
(1988a) based on interpretations from experimen-
tal results. P-shear linkages create a throughgo-
ing rupture with acceleration proceeding as as-
perities are cleared by abrasive and adhesive wear,
as well as by frictional melting during further
surface refinement.
Maximum slip velocities
would be associated with the most evolved
throughgoing structures where fault surfaces be-
come cushioned by zones of cataclastic, plastic or
viscous flow.
Using the sequence of deformational struc-
tures, processes and wear mechanisms expected
during a discrete coseismic slip event, along with
the hydrodynamic characteristics of the fault zone
(Mase and Smith 1987), a conceptual model for
dynamic rupture can be formulated. This concep-
tual model consists of a migrating fracture tip
that leads expanding zones of distinctive struc-
tures, fault products and deformational processes
developed during rupture propagation and slip
(Fig. 9). The development of coseismic slip would
follow the advancing rupture front behind a lead-
ing shear fracture process zone. As the rupture
tip and process zone pass any point along the
fault, the blocks will experience the rupture, ac-
celeration, maximum slip rate and deceleration
stages of a typical slip event as depicted in the
static rupture model.
Slip window
While total rupture duration during the Impe-
rial Valley earthquake was N 12 s, slip duration
Fig. 10. Dynamic rupture model showing pseudotachylyte
production and development within a moving friction melt
window that trails the leading propagating rupture front.
Melting during slip, after some surface refinement, marks the
leading edge of the window. Solidification, sometime after the
cessation of slip, marks the trailing edge of the window.
at any one point averaged only 1.2 s (Archuleta,
1984; Sibson, 1989): “Thus fault slip at any in-
stant during rupture propagation was restricted
to a band extending only a few kilometres behind
the advancing rupture front” (Sibson, 1989, p. 5).
Active dynamic slip along the fault would be
“controlled by a moving window of rupture area”
(Quin, 1990, p. 112).
The leading edge of this moving slip window
(Fig. 10) represents the actual rupture front dur-
ing propagation. The deceleration stage leading
to the cessation of slip defines the trailing edge of
the slip window, which propagates at near-seismic
velocities as does the leading rupture front
(Scholz, 1990). This propagating “healing” front
was initially modeled by Madariaga (1976) as a
wave emanating back from the termination of
rupture at the perimeter of the rupture plane.
Based on the unidirectional rupture propagation
in the Imperial Valley earthquake, slip is repre-
sented by a migrating slip window with the heal-
ing front trailing the propagation front to the
perimeter of the rupture plane. The configura-
tion of this slip window at any particular time
during rupture reflects both the time of initial
rupture and the duration of slip.
Friction-melt window
The point at which the first friction melt devel-
ops during slip marks the leading edge of a “fric-
tion-melt window” illustrated in Figure 10. This
23x
leading edge must follow some distance behind
the propagating rupture front to allow time for
rupture evolution to proceed to the appropriate
level of surface refinement, slip velocity, slip du-
ration and frictional heat generation. With the
friction melt surviving after the cessation of slip,
the trailing edge of the friction-melt window also
follows some distance behind the back edge of
the migrating slip patch, possibly interacting with
a surge of post-seismic fluid flow (Sibson, 1981).
The friction-melt window is shown in simplified
form and assumes a homogeneous host rock, as
well as uniform fault vein width and fluid activity
with depth in the fault zone. The longer cooling
times for crystalline pseudotachylyte at greater
depths would alter this simplified model. The
upper depth limit for melt production may be
highly variable and controlled by the interaction
of pore fluids and lower confining pressures. The
lower boundary would extend into the plastic
flow regime following the rupture depth limit for
the seismogenic zone.
Thus, a dynamic friction melt window (Fig. 10)
will trail the propagating rupture front through-
out the duration of slip following the initial accel-
eration, and linger for some time after the cessa-
tion of slip. The configuration of this window at
any given time during the rupture event will fluc-
tuate in response to changes in slip velocity and
duration, as well as the changes in rock type and
hydrous fluids along the propagation path. The
distribution of pseudotachylyte within the rupture
plane may reflect the areas of greatest slip dura-
tion and highest slip velocity during the event.
The passage of this window defines the area
along the rupture capable of frictional melting,
but it is ultimately the local structural setting and
hydrodynamic conditions that control the stress
configurations and magnitudes, the rupture and
wear processes during slip and the possibility of
producing friction melts.
Discussion
Wear sequences and surface refinement
The formation of pseudotachylyte along faults
in brittle versus plastic regimes requires slightly
different initial deformation mechanisms. Fric-
M.T
SWANSON
tional melting during coseismic slip could develop
through early abrasive wear and cataclasis at up-
per crustal levels, or through early adhesive wear
and plastic flow in the mylonitic fault setting at
lower crustal levels. Within a strike-slip seismo-
genie zone, slip would proceed from initial rup-
ture toward surface refinement and frictional
melting through two different sequences at differ-
ent crustal levels. These sequences include an
upper abrasive wear-dominant model and a lower
adhesive wear-dominant model.
Abrasive wear-dominant model
The abrasive wear-dominant sequence (Fig.
lla) operates in the upper crustal levels of the
strike-slip seismogenic zone. The abrasive wear
sequence develops within active fault zones domi-
nated by cataclasis and may involve Mode III
shear fracture propagation. Initial process zones
during rupture propagation would consist of
oblique tension fracture arrays at shallow levels
(Cox and Scholz, 1988a,b) and en echelon R-shear
arrays at deeper levels. Surface refinement pro-
ceeds through forward clast rotation (Engelder,
1974) and comminution of the initiation breccia
(Sibson, 19861, or through P-shear linkages in the
en echelon array. Asperity reduction would be
through brittle fracture, brecciation and com-
minution with high initial wear rates (Scholz,
1990). Continued slip leads to refined particulate
flow within a cushion of cataclasite as it builds up
along the fault surface. Grain-size reduction pro-
ceeds to some critical level where further strain
becomes localized along oblique R-shears within
the cataclasite layer, or along wall rock boundary
shears (Engelder, 1978; Scholz, 1990). Pseudo-
tachylyte in these active cataclastic fault zones
tends to be thin fault veins sporadically devel-
oped along the margins of evolved cataclastic
layers where shear strain has localized with high
enough slip rates for frictional melting. Xenolith
populations would include abundant cataclasite
fragments. The intimate association of friction
melts with cataclasis as outlined by Magloughlin
(1990, 1992) would suggest that some pseudo-
tachylyte may develop from a cornminuted pre-
cursor, particularly at shallow crustal levels as in
this abrasive wear-dominant model.
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
239
GENERATION
Adhesive wear-dominantmodel
The adhesive wear-dominant sequence (Fig.
lib) operates in the lower crustal levels of the
strike-slip seismogenic zone. The adhesive se-
quence develops within active mylonitic fault
zones that may be dominated by anisotropy-con-
trolled Mode II shear fracture propagation. Rup-
ture and slip proceed from initial layer-parallel
Y-shear surfaces in leading process zones to over-
lap duplex linkages. The reactivation of the pre-
existing planar anisotropy during rupture in these
rocks provides a near-planar slip surface with few
initial asperities and low initial wear rates during
slip. Rapid surface refinement with a transition
Once developed, these cataclastic layers may
act as zones of continued weakness allowing slow
interseismic creep. Strain would be accommo-
dated by grain sliding and rotation, diffusion mass
transfer and bulk cataclastic flow, as well as the
passage of subsidiary rupture fronts. Deformation
of the pseudotachylyte layers by rupture and the
associated abrasive wear produces fragments of
pseudotachylyte as part of the new cataclasite
layers. Post-seismic fluid flow may also result in
the complete cementation of the newly-developed
fault rock (Stel, 1981, 1986) and alteration of any
existing pseudotachylyte.
Successive ruptures
must then break through indurated cataclasite.
/
/
//
/
/I
a. Pt-CATACLASITE
/
/
/
/’
Pt
’
foult veins
/
/
,’
discrete
pt surfaces
,’
/
/
,’
/
/I
/
,/
/
/
// <’
loyered
cotoclosite
/
/
’
/
/
/
/
initiotion
breccio
P sheor
linkage
/
-1
I
/’
plastic/’
shearing
I’
localized’
adhesion
/
sinterihg
/
cotqcbstic
flow
/’
,’
i
-
obrosive
&or
comminution
/
I’
/
’
/
,I\
+%_~~--y
/
//
/
R sheo/
orroy
-
viscous /
flow
/
i
/
/
’
’
-- /
/
leading
/
process zone
\ /’ -
/
_’
ruptbre
propagation
/
/
/
b. Pt - MYLONITE
Fig. 11. (a) Upper crustal, abrasive wear-dominant model for frictional melting based on the pseudotachylyte (Pt)-cataclasite
association, showing the progression of structures and wear mechanisms at cataclasite zone boundaries and internal oblique shears.
(b) Lower crustal, adhesive wear-dominant model for frictional melting based on the pseudotachylyte (Pt)-mylonite association,
showing progression of structures and wear mechanisms along foliation-parallel slip surfaces.
3,40
to total adhesion, as the real area of contact
approaches the total area, leads directly to plastic
smearing and laminar plastic flow without the
extensive development of cushions of cataclasite.
The surface refinement process is greatly acceler-
ated thereby enhancing adhesion, plastic flow and
frictional melting during slip which results in a
much greater potential for the generation of
pseudotachylyte. Larger, relatively xenolith-free
fault veins and injection vein systems may be
prominent. Evidence for initiation breccia (Sib-
son, 19861, cataclasis and abrasive wear will be
rare. Further plastic deformation in the mylonites
typically reworks the solidified melt veins where
they become part of the host rock for the next
series of ruptures. An intimate association be-
tween pseudotachylyte and ultramylonite may also
be prevalent where early formed pseudotachylyte
veins have been plastically-deformed and recrys-
tallized to bands of ultramylonite Gibson, 1980a;
Passchier, 1982).
Fault zone evolution
The occurrence of pseudotachylyte within cer-
tain fault zones and in specific structural settings
ties those structures to dynamic rupture propaga-
tion during paleoseismic events. Earthquake rup-
turing can now be viewed as an important struc-
tural process that is a key factor in the cumulative
evolution of fault zones (Sibson, 1989). The pres-
ence of pseudotachylyte along faults enables the
distinction to be made between those seismic
structures resulting directly from dynamic rupture
propagation and aseismic structures that develop
through plastic shearing, cataclastic flow or
small-increment, cumulative displacements; all of
which contribute significantly to fault zone evolu-
tion.
Pseudotachylyte is clearly found within fault
zones in various stages of their evolution. Sharp,
small-scale brittle faults typically undergo fric-
tional melting after only a few centimeters of slip.
Initial en echelon fault arrays and linking struc-
tures can both develop friction melts. Friction
melts can also be found in more evolved fault
zones due to strain localization as cataclasite
layers accumulate displacement, and during tran-
M.7.
SWANSON
sient discontinuities in flow for well-developed
mylonite zones. Both assemblages of fault rocks
provide a clear example of the structural control
of strain-induced anisotropy in providing avenues
of layer-parallel slip for incremental ruptures.
Thus, pseudotachylyte generation depends on an
initial level of fault surface development, but can
occur at any time during fault zone evolution
from the first increment to the latest slip incre-
ment contributing to finite fault zone evolution.
Conclusions
The generation of pseudotachylyte
by fric-
tional melting along faults is an extremely rapid
and dynamic process where physical conditions
such as frictional shear resistance, fluid pressure,
temperature and stresses are found to fluctuate
over wide ranges in the second to microsecond
time scales. Pseudotachylyte generated during co-
seismic slip is produced, developed and solidified
within a moving friction melt window that trails
the propagating slip patch during passage of the
earthquake rupture. Pseudotachylyte is produced
along generating slip surfaces after sufficient sur-
face refinement and is preserved in fault vein and
injection vein reservoirs. Pseudotachylyte shows
evidence of a complex melt history from flash
melting to final solidification, with evidence of
both viscous shear and injection flow, assimilation
of xenoliths, formation of crystallites and vesicles
and subsequent plastic and brittle deformation.
Transient melt pressures may exceed lithostatic
pressures with thermal pressurization and melt
lubrication of the fault zone. Rupture and slip in
cataclastic faults of the upper seismogenic zone
develop through Mode III shear fracture propa-
gation and dominantly abrasive wear with slip
concentration occurring at wall rock boundaries
to produce friction melts. Rupture and slip in
mylonitic fault zones of the lower seismogenic
zone develop through Mode II shear fracture
propagation
and dominantly
adhesive wear.
Layer-parallel ruptures in mylonitic zones have a
greater potential for pseudotachylyte generation
due to the higher real area of contact during slip
initiation that allows total adhesion and rapid
PSEUDOTACHYLYTE
GENERATION
plastic shear heating with little preliminary abra-
sive wear.
Acknowledgements
Research on pseudotachylyte-bearing
faults in
southern Maine was supported by the U.S. Geo-
logical Survey’s National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program, Awards 14-OSOOOl-G1106;
14-0%OOOl-G139.5; and 14-08-OOOl-G1702 for
1985; 1987; and 1989. Released time from aca-
demic duties and support for field work in west-
ern Greenland was provided by the University of
Southern Maine. Thanks to John Spray, Jerry
Magloughlin and an anonymous reviewer for their
constructive comments on earlier versions of this
manuscript.
References
Allen, A.R., 1979. Mechanism of frictional fusion in fault
zones. J. Struct. Geol., 1: 231-243.
Archuleta, R.J., 1984. A faulting model for the 1979 Imperial
Valley earthquake. J. Geophys. Res., 89: 4559-4585.
Bowden, F.P. and Tabor, D., 1973. Friction-An
Introduction
to Tribology. Anchor Press, Garden City, N.Y., 178 pp.
Cardwell, R.K., Chinn, D.S., Moore, G.F. and Turcotte, D.L.,
1978. Frictional heating on a fault zone of finite thickness.
Geophys. J. R. Astron. Sot., 52: 525-530.
Cox, S.J.D. and Scholz, C.H., 1988a. An experimental study of
shear fracture in rocks: mechanical observations. J. Geo-
phys. Res., 93: 3307-3320.
Cox, S.J.D. and Scholz, C.H., 1988b. On the formation and
growth of faults: an experimental study. J. Struct. Geol.,
10: 413-430.
Engelder, J.T., 1974. Cataclasis and the generation of fault
gouge. Geol. Sot. Am. Bull., 85: 1515-1522.
Engelder, J.T., 1978. Aspects of asperity-surface interaction
and surface damage of rocks during experimental fric-
tional sliding. Pure Appl. Geophys., 116: 705-716.
Friedman, M. and Logan, J.M., 1970. Microscopic feather
fractures. Geol. Sot. Am. Bull., 11: 3417-3420.
Grocott, J., 1981. Fracture geometry of pseudotachylyte gen-
eration zones: a study of shear fractures formed during
seismic events. J. Struct. Geol., 3: 169-178.
Hanmer, S., 1989. Initiation of cataclastic flow in a mylonite
zone. J. Struct. Geol., 11: 751-762.
Hobbs, B.E., Ord, A. and Teyssier, C., 1986. Earthquakes in
the ductile regime? Pure Appl. Geophys., 124: 225-268.
Jaeger, J.C., 1942. Moving sources of heat and the tempera-
ture of sliding contacts. J. Proc. R. Sot. N.S.W., 76:
203-224.
241
Jiefan, H., Ganglin, C., Yonghong, Z. and Ren, W., 1990. An
experimental study of the strain field development prior to
failure of a marble plate under compression. In: S. Das
and M. Ohnaka (Editors), Earthquake Source Processes.
Tectonophysics, 175: 269-284.
Knipe, R.J., 1989. Deformation mechanisms-recognition
from natural tectonites. J. Struct. Geol., 11: 127-146.
Lachenbruch, A.H., 1980. Frictional sliding, fluid pressure
and the resistance to fault motion. J. Geophys. Res., 85:
6097-6112.
Laqueche, H., Rouseau, A. and Valentin, G., 1986. Crack
propagation under Mode I and II loading in slate schist.
Int. J. Rock Mech., 23: 347-354.
Logan, J.M., 1990. Shear melting of quartz sandstone under
controlled laboratory experiments. Geol. Sot. Am., Abstr.
Progr., Annu. Meet. (Dallas), 22: A286.
Madariaga, R., 1976. Dynamics of an expanding circular fault.
Seismol. Sot. Am. Bull., 66: 636-666.
Maddock, R.H., 1983. Melt origin of fault-generated pseudo-
tachylytes demonstrated by textures. Geology, 11: 105-108.
Maddock, R.H., 1986. Partial melting of lithic porphyroclasts
in fault-generated pseudotachylytes. Neues Jahrb. Min-
eral., Abh., 155: 1-14.
Maddock, R.H., 1990. Factors controlling the geochemistry
and textures of fault-generated pseudotachylytes. Geol.
Sot. Am., Abstr. Progr., Annu. Meet. (Dallas), 22: A285.
Maddock, R.H., Grocott, J. and Van Nes, M., 1987. Vesicles,
amygdales and similar structures in fault-generated pseu-
dotachylytes. Lithos, 20: 419-432.
Magloughlin, J.F., 1989. The nature and significance of pseu-
dotachylite from the Nason terrane, North Cascade Moun-
tains, Washington. J. Struct. Geol., 11: 907-917.
Magloughlin, J.F., 1990. Evidence for the cataclasite-pseudo-
tachylite connection. Geol. Sot. Am., Abstr. Progr., Annu.
Meet. (Dallas), 22: A285.
Magloughlin, J.F., 1992. Microstructural and chemical changes
associated with cataclasis and frictional melting at shallow
crustal levels: the cataclasite-pseudotachylyte
connection.
Tectonophysics, 204: 243.
Masch, L., 1990. Frictional melting in hvo big landslides-
Langtang Himal (Nepal) and Kijfels (eastern Alps, Aus-
tria). Geol. Sot. Am., Abstr. Progr., Annu. Meet. (Dallas),
22: A286.
Masch, L., Wenk, H.R. and Preuss, E., 1985. Electron mi-
croscopy study of hyalomylonites-evidence
for frictional
melting in landslides. Tectonophysics, 115: 131-160.
Mase, C.W. and Smith, L., 1985. Pore-fluid pressures and
frictional heating on a fault surface. Pure Appl. Geophys.,
122: 583-607.
Mase, C.W. and Smith, L., 1987. Effects of frictional heating
on the thermal, hydrologic, and mechanical response of a
fault. J. Geophys. Res., 92: 6249-6272.
McKenzie, D.P. and Brune, J.N., 1972. Melting of fault planes
during large earthquakes. Geophys. J. R. Astron. Sot., 29:
65-78.
242
Moore, H.E. and Sibson, R.H., 1978. Experimental thermal
fragmentation in relation to seismic faulting. Tectono-
physics, 49: T9-T17.
Ohnaka, M. and Kuwahara, Y., 1990. Characteristic features
of local breakdown near a crack-tip in the transition zone
from nucleation to unstable rupture during stick-slip shear
failure. In: S. Das and M. Ohnaka (Editors), Earthquake
Source Processes. Tectonophysics, 175: 197-220.
Park, R.G., 1961. The pseudotachylite of the Gairloch Dis-
trict, Ross-shire, Scotland. Am. J. Sci., 2.59: 542-550.
Passchier, C., 1982. Pseudotachylyte and the development of
ultramylonite bands in the Saint-BarthCl&ny Massif,
French Pyrenees. J. Struct. Geol., 4: 69-79.
Passchier, C., 1984. The generation of ductile and brittle
deformation bands in a low-angle mylonite zone. J. Struct.
Geol., 6: 273-281.
Power, W.L. and Tullis, T. 1989. The relationship between
slickenside surfaces in fine-grained quartz and the seismic
cycle. J. Struct. Geol., 11: 879-893.
Quin, H., 1990. Dynamic stress drop and rupture dynamics of
the October 15. 1979 Imperial Valley, California earth-
quake. Tectonophysics, 175: 93-117.
Rabinowicz, E., 1965. Friction and Wear of Materials. Wiley,
New York, 244 pp.
Scholz, C.H., 1988. The brittle-plastic transition and the depth
of seismic faulting. Geol. Rundsch., 77: 319-328.
Scholz, C.H., 1990. The mechanics of earthquakes and fault-
ing. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 439 pp.
Scholz, C.H. and Engelder, J.T., 1976. The role of asperity
indentation and ploughing in rock friction, I. Asperity
creep and stick-slip. Int. J. Rock Mech., 13: 149-154.
Schwartz, D.P. and Coppersmith, K.J., 1984. Fault behavior
and characteristic earthquakes: examples from the Wasatch
and San Andreas fault zone. J. Geophys. Res., 89: 5681-
5698,
Shimada, M. and Cho. A., 1990. Two types of brittle fracture
of silicate rocks under confining pressure and their impli-
cations in the earth’s crust. In: S. Das and M. Ohnaka
(Editors), Earthquake Source Processes. Tectonophysics,
175: 221-235.
Shimamoto, T., 1989. The origin of S-C mylonites and a new
fault-zone model. J. Struct. Geol., 11: 51-64.
Sibson, R.H., 1973. Interactions between temperature and
pore fluid pressure during earthquake faulting and a
mechanism for partial or total stress relief. Nature, 243:
66-68.
Sibson, R.H., 1975. Generation of pseudotachylyte by ancient
seismic faulting. Geophys. J. R. Astron. Sot., 43: 775-794.
Sibson, R.H., 1977. Kinetic shear resistance, fluid pressure
and radiation efficiency during seismic faulting. Pure Appl.
Geophys., 115: 387-400.
Sibson, R.H., 1980a. Transient discontinuities in ductile shear
zones. J. Struct. Geol., 2: 165-171.
Sibson, R.H., 1980b. Power dissipation and stress levels on
faults in the upper crust. J. Geophys. Res., 85: 6239-6247.
Sibson, R.N., 1981. Fluid flow accompanying faulting: field
evidence and models. In: D.W. Simpson and P.G. Richards
(Editors), Earthquake Prediction: An International Re-
view. Am. Geophys. Union, Maurice Ewing Ser., 4: 593
603.
Sibson, R.H., 1983. Continental fault structure and the shal-
low earthquake source. J. Geol. Sot. London, 140: 741-767.
Sibson, R.H., 1986. Brecciation processes in fault zones: infer-
ences from earthquake rupturing. Pure Appl. Geophys..
124: 159-176.
Sibson, R.H., 1989. Earthquake faulting as a structural pro-
cess. J. Struct. Geol., 11: l-14.
Spray. J.G., 1987. Artificial generation of pseudotachylyte
using friction welding apparatus: simulation of melting on
a fault plane. J. Struct. Geol., 9: 49-60.
Spray, J.G., 1989. Friction phenomena in rock: an introduc-
tion. J. Struct. Geol., 11: 783-785.
Spray, J.G., 1992. A physical basis for the frictional melting of
some rock-forming minerals. Tectonophysics, 204: 205-
221.
Stel, H., 1981. Crystal growth in cataclasites: diagnostic mi-
crostructures and implications. Tectonophysics, 78: 585-
600.
Stel, H., 1986. The effect of cyclic operation of brittle and
ductile deformation on the metamorphic assemblage in
cataclasites and myionites. Pure Appl. Geophys.. 124:
289-307.
Strehlau, J., 1986. A discussion of the depth extent of rupture
in large continental earthquakes. Geophys. Monogr., Am.
Geophys. Union, 37: 131-145.
Swanson, M.T., 1988. Pseudota~hylyte-bearing strike-slip du-
plex structures in the Fort Foster Brittle Zone of southern
Maine. J. Struct. Geol., 10: 813-828.
Swanson, M.T., 1989a. Structural duplexing in the strike-slip
environment. In: D.P. Schwartz, and R.H. Sibson, (Edi-
tors), U.S. Geol. Surv., Proc. of Workshop XLV, Fault
Segmentation and Controls on Rupture Initiation and
Termination. US. Geol. Surv., Open-File Rep. 89-315:
376-385.
Swanson, M.T., 1989b. Sidewall ripouts in strike-slip faults. J.
Struct. Geol., 11: 933-948.
Swanson, M.T., 1989~. Mesoscale Acadian deformation mech-
anisms during regional horizontal extension and dis-
tributed strike-slip simple shear strain, Casco Bay, Maine.
Geol. Sot. Am., Abstr. Progr., Annu. Meet. (St. Louis), 21:
Ah6
Teufel, L. and Logan, J.M., 1978. Effect of displacement rate
on the real area of contact and temperatures generated
during frictional sliding of Tennessee Sandstone. Pure
Appl. Geophys., 116: 840-865.
Toyoshima, T., 1990. Pseudotachylite from the main zone of
the Hidaka Metamo~hi~ Belt, Hokkaido, northern Japan.
J. Metamorph. Geol., 8: 507-523.
Wenk, H.R. and Weiss, L.E., 1982. Al-rich calcic pyroxene in
pseudotachylite: an indicator of high pressure and high
temperature? Tectonophysics, 84: 329-341.
