GEOCHRONOMETRIA Vol. 20, pp 81-86, 2001 – Journal on Methods and Applications of Absolute Chronology
STABLE ISOTOPES AS RECORD OF CLIMATIC CHANGES
OF DANIGLACIAL IN LITHUANIA
ALGIRDAS GAIGALAS1, ANNA PAZDUR2, STANIS£AW HA£AS3,
JACEK PAWLYTA2, VAIDOTAS KAZAKAUSKAS4
1
Department of Geology and Mineralogy, Vilnius University, Čiurlionio 21/27, LT-2009 Vilnius, Lithuania
(e-mail: Algirdas.Gaigalas@gf.vu.lt)
2
Department of Radioisotopes, Institute of Physics, Silesian University of Technology,
Krzywoustego 2, 44-100 Gliwice, Poland (e-mail: pazdur@zeus.polsl.gliwice.pl)
3
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Physics, Maria Curie Sk3odowska University,
Plac Marii Curie Sk3odowskiej 1, 20-031 Lublin, Poland (e-mail: halas@tytan.umes.lublin.pl)
4
Institute of Geology, LT-2009 Vilnius, Lithuania (e-mail: vaid.kaz@geologin.lt)
words:
Key words
STABLE ISOTOPES,
GLACIOLACUSTRINE
SEDIMENTS, CLAY,
VARVES, CLIMATE
CHANGES, PHASIAL,
DANIGLACIAL,
LITHUANIA
Abstract: Development of glaciolacustrine basins and varved clay sedimentation in Lithuania
are closely connected with the course of ice retreat during Daniglacial time from 16,000 till
13,000 BP. Isotopic composition (δ13C and δ18O) of chemogenic carbonaceous samples from
glaciolacustrine varved clays, which spread near glacier edge of South-Lithuanian (Balbieriškis
section), Middle-Lithuanian (Girininkai section) and North-Lithuanian (Joniðkëlis section)
Phases of the Baltija (Pomeranian) Stage of Nemunas (Vistulian) Glaciation, has been stud-
ied. The obtained stable isotope data well confirm climatic changes of Daniglacial time in
Lithuania. The gradual warming of climate is connected with the South-Lithuanian to Middle-
Lithuanian and the Middle-Lithuanian to North-Lithuanian Interphasials as well as with the
South Lithuanian interoscillations. The Interphasial lacustrine sedimentation with rhythmi-
cal lamination of carbonaceous sediments was observed in the middle part of the Balbieriškis
section (at a depth of 3.1-5.9 m). The following climatic changes of Daniglacial time in
Lithuania are distinguished: (1) stadial (3000-6000), (2) glaciophasial (500-1000), (3) glacio-
oscillation (500-1000) years and (1) interstadial (1000-2000), (2) interphasial (250-450),
(3) glacio-interoscillation (20-40) years. Regular succession of Daniglacial climatic and sedi-
mentation changes in the local periglacial glaciolacustrine lakes, conditioned by recession of
the last Scandinavian ice sheet, was revealed in the glaciolacustrine-lacustrine sediments for
the first time.
1. INTRODUCTION
Varved deposits of glaciolacustrine basins are widely
spread in Lithuania. The largest occurrences of them are
connected with the glacier edge of its South-Lithuanian,
Middle-Lithuanian and North-Lithuanian Phases of the
Baltija (Pomeranian) Stadial of Nemunas (Vistulian)
Glaciation (Gudelis and Mikaila, 1960).
The proglacial lakes were dammed near the margin
of the retreating ice-sheet of the Last Nemunas (Vistulian)
Glaciation (Kazakauskas and Gaigalas, 2000). The maxi-
mum of the Nemunas Glaciation in Lithuania dates about
20,000-18,000 BP (the first Grûda Stadial). The glacier
of the next Baltija Stadial reached its maximum at 16,000
years ago (Gaigalas, 2000). Approximately after 16,000
years ago the glacier of the Baltija Stadial began the re-
treat from the maximal limits of its spread.
Development of glaciolacustrine basins and varved
clay sedimentation in Lithuania are closely connected with
the course of ice retreat during Daniglacial time from
16,000 to 13,000 BP (Fig. 1). Sedimentation of varved
sediments of glaciolacustrine basins in Lithuania went on
for 3000 years. The time of the glacier retreat from the
North Lithuanian end moraine correspond to the transi-
tion from Daniglacial (16,000-13,000 BP) to Gotiglacial
(13,000-10,000 BP) epoch. The age of the boundary be-
tween the Daniglacial and Gotiglacial was established at
13,200 years BP due to the dating of some interstadial
deposits in central Latvia (Raukas, 1993; Gaigalas, 1994).
Approximately 16,000 years ago the recession of the
glacier margin of the Baltija Stadial from the maximal lim-
its of its spread began. About 15,000 years ago the glacier
stopped on the line of the end moraines of South-
Lithuanian Phasial. In South-Lithuanian Phasial there are
distinct branches of at least three oscillatory end moraines
Stable isotopes as record of climatic changes...
About 15,000 years ago the glacier stopped on the line
of the South Lithuanian end moraines and, thus, there
are some distinct complexes (Balbieriškis section) of
varved clays in the Simnas-Balbieriškis basin. Next stop
of the receding ice cover at the Middle Lithuanian end
moraines occurred about 14,000 years ago. The Kaunas-
Kaiðiadorys glaciolacustrine basin (Girininkai section)
formed between the South Lithuanian and Middle
Lithuanian end moraines. The Mûða glaciolacustrine
basin (Joniðkëlis section) formed after the retreat and
during new recession of the glacier at the moraine belt of
North Lithuania.
The investigated glaciolacustrine sediments are attrib-
uted to deepwater lithofacies that have generally formed
in a proglacial subenvironment. However, in the early
stages of the glaciolacustrine basin development, the sedi-
mentation could also take place in terminal (marginal),
supraglacial and subglacial environments. During the cli-
matic amelioration in an extraglacial subenvironment, the
glaciolacustrine sedimentation could change into lacus-
trine, and gradually shift back to glaciolacustrine. In such
cases, mixed (glaciolacustrine-lacustrine or lacustrine-
glaciolacustrine) sediments formed. Largest Lithuanian
glaciolacustrine basin sediments were ascribed to facies
of proglacial lakes that developed through the interaction
of glacial and periglacial environments (Ðinkûnas and
Jurgaitis, 1997).
and some complexes of varved clays in Simnas-Balbieriškis
glaciolacustrine basin of that time. As may be seen from
the section of Balbieriškis exposure (Fig. 2), there are 5
different sedimentogenetic series of varved deposits
connected with the South-Lithuanian retreating ice cover.
The 370 varves were counted in Balbieriškis section. Next
stop of the receding ice cover at the Middle-Lithuanian
end moraines lasted till 14,000 years ago. The glacio-
lacustrine basins Kaunas-Kai ðiadorys and Jûra-Ðeðupë
were situated between the South Lithuanian and Middle
Lithuanian end moraines. The varvometric data show that
duration of the Kaunas-Kaiðiadorys basin was about 260
years (Fig. 1). The Linkuva-Pasvalys glaciolacustrine ba-
sin was formed in the moraine belt of North Lithuania
after the retreat and during new recession of the glacier.
The Joniðkëlis section contains about 120 varves (Fig. 1).
Sedimentation of different litho-types of glaciolacustrine
clays was closely related to climatic changes, deglaciation,
melting and retreat of the Last Scandinavian ice-sheet.
This is confirmed by the study of stable isotope content
in varved clays of glaciolacustrine basins. Carbon and
oxygen stable isotope composition reflects cold climatic
conditions of Daniglacial time.
2. SECTIONS AND SAMPLES STUDIED
The isotopic composition (δ13C and δ18O) has been
studied for chemogenic carbonaceous samples. Eighty-
eight samples of glaciolacustrine varved clays were col-
lected from sediments of proglacial basins of the South-
Lithuanian (Balbieriðkis section, 49 samples), Middle-
Lithuanian (Girininkai section, 21 samples), North-
Lithuanian (Joniðkëlis section, 18 samples) Phases of the
Baltija (Pomeranian) Stadial of Nemunas (Vistulian)
Stage in Lithuania (Fig. 1).
3. RESULTS OF THE INVESTIGATIONS
AND DISCUSSION
The results of δ18O and δ13C analysis are given for
Balbieriškis, Girininkai and Joniðkëlis sections. All of
them were calculated versus PDB standard. Carbon iso-
tope 13C content shows, that part of the carbonates is
Fig. 1. Map showing location of
investigated sites: Balbieri ðkis,
Girininkai and Joniðkëlis sections
of glaciolacustrine clays. Limits
of glacier advances: B – Baltija
Stadial, SL – South-Lithuanian
Phasial, ML – Middle-Lithuanian
Phasial, and NL – North-Lithuanian
Phasial.
82
A. Gaigalas et al.
allogenic – inwashed and redeposited from Late Pleis-
tocene tills.
Different glaciolacustrine sediments, linked with gla-
cier oscillation, recession and re-advance, as well as lacus-
trine sediments accumulated during interphasials were
found. The suspension flows from the thawing glacier,
temperature and hydrodynamic conditions of water in
oligotrophic lake played a decisive role in sedimentation.
Also an activity of organic world, which increased during
summer periods, influenced the lacustrine sedimentation.
The lacustrine deposits are calcareous and they contain
seasonal bands of carbonates in interphasial layers. The
lacustrine sedimentation reflects climatic changes within
the limits of 120-130 years (the deposits at a depth 3.1-
5.9 m in the middle part of the Balbieriškis section).
ries of varved deposits connected with at least three os-
cillations of retreating ice cover of the South-Lithuanian
Phasial. Five climatic evolutionary stages have been de-
termined: (1) climatic warming and intense glacial retreat,
with two oscillations during which climatic cooling took
place (sediments at a depth of 6.7-8.2 m); (2) stabiliza-
tion of climatic conditions with a stable position of the
glacier, characterized by sedimentation of homogeneous
clays (at a depth of 5.9-6.5 m); (3) sudden climatic warm-
ing and fast glacier retreat, characterized by lacustrine
sedimentation (at a depth of 3.1-5.9 m); (4) sudden cli-
matic cooling and glacier re-advance, characterized by
prevailing glaciolacustrine sedimentation (at a depth of
0.5-3.1 m); (5) final climatic warming and glacier retreat,
characterized by the deposition of ablation till (at a depth
Balbieriškis section.
As may be seen from the section of Balbieriškis expo-
sure (Fig. 2) there are 5 different sedimentogenetic se-
Fig. 2. Variation of stable isotope composition of carbon ( δ13C)
and oxygen (δ18O) in glaciolacustrine sediments of Balbieriškis
section: 1 – soil, 2 – homogeneous clay, 3 – laminated clay,
4 – clay disturbed by cryogenic process, 5 – carbonates, 6 – till.
Fig. 3. Variation of δ13C and δ18O in glaciolacustrine sediments
of Girininkai section. For lithological legend, see Fig. 2.
83
Stable isotopes as record of climatic changes...
Three climatic evolutionary stages have been deter-
mined in Joniðkëlis section (Fig. 4): (1) short climatic
warming period with glacial retreat, characterized by sedi-
mentation of distinctly laminated calcareous clays (sedi-
ments at a depth of 1.8-2.6 m); (2) short cooling period
and glacial re-advance, characterized by glaciotectonic
deformation (at a depth of 1.0-1.8 m); (3) short period of
stable climatic conditions and final climatic warming, char-
acterized by indistinctly laminated or homogeneous clays,
overlaid by silt and sand (at a depth of 0-1.0). A bed of
massive clays finishes the sequence of Joniðkëlis section.
of 0.3-0.5 m). The isotope data well confirm sudden cli-
matic changes at the South-Lithuanian – Middle-
Lithuanian Interphasial and during interoscillations of the
South-Lithuanian Phasial. During interphasial climatic
warming sedimentation had a completely different char-
acter in a glaciolacustrine basin. Deposition of seasonal
calcareous laminae is characteristic of lacustrine sedimen-
tation. These layers were deposited during late summer
and autumn. Their formation depended not only on tem-
perature, but on pH reaction, organic material content,
and regime of CO2 as well. Such calcareous lamination
was observed in sediments of the middle part of the
Balbieriškis section (at a depth of 3.1–5.9 m). The occur-
rence of calcareous layers indicates climatic changes of
seasonal character, which had an influence on sedimen-
tation of laminated varved clays. Sediment lamination
commonly reflects an annual rhythm of sedimentation,
governed by the annual temperature cycle. This cycle not
only caused great variations in the physical and biologi-
cal conditions of a lake, but also in a sediment influx. The
variations led to sedimentation of different kinds of ma-
terial at different times of deglaciation and retreat of the
Last Glacial.
In sediments of Balbieriškis section three climatic os-
cillations and glaciolacustrine deposits related to them are
reflected. The megainteroscillation (interphasial) climatic
warming (duration ca 120-130 years) is represented by
lacustrine sediments, lying at a depth of 3.1-5.9 m, between
glaciolacustrine sediments of the second and third oscil-
lations.
4. CONCLUSIONS
Interpretation of analytic data on stable isotope com-
position of carbonaceous sediments in glaciolacustrine
sediments of the Daniglacial in Lithuania helps to solve
problems of sedimentation temperature conditions and
genesis of the carbonate sediments.
The glaciolacustrine-lacustrine profile of sediments
can be subdivided into 3 sedimentary intervals: 1) the time
of retreat of the oscillating ice margin (glaciolacustrine
sedimentation), 2) interphasial (or interoscillation) lacus-
trine sedimentation with seasonal warm-cold contrasts,
3) re-advance of the oscillating ice (new glaciolacustrine
sedimentation). The distribution of the chemogenic car-
bonates in glaciolacustrine sediments depended on sea-
sonal character of the climate.
Girininkai section.
This section starts with varved clays deposited during
the Middle-Lithuanian Phasial in the Kaunas-Kaišiadorys
glaciolacustrine basin. With warming of the climate, the
lamination of clays becomes more expressed.
In Girininkai section (Fig. 3), three climatic evolution-
ary stages have been determined: (1) short climatic warm-
ing with an oscillatory retreat of the glacier, character-
ized by sedimentation of distinctly laminated clays with
prevailing winter layers (sediments at a depth of 6.5-9.5 m);
(2) more stable climatic conditions, characterized by sedi-
mentation of indistinctly laminated clays (at a depth of
3.2-6.5 m); (3) climatic warming, characterized by sedi-
mentation of laminated silty and calcareous clays (at
a depth of 0-3.2 m).
During the climatic warming, when the glacier melted
more intensely, frozen till clasts were deposited within
summer layers of sediments (lower part of the 6.5-9.5 m
interval). The climate of this time interval was marked by
warm summers and variable winters. Warm climate
conditioned interphasial sedimentation (lower part of the
0-3.2 m interval) as evidenced by traces of organic matter.
Joniðkëlis section.
This section is connected with the development of the
Mûða basin near the edge of the North-Lithuanian Phasial
glacier. Climate changes during the North-Lithuanian
Phasial are reflected in the glaciolacustrine clays of the
Mûða periglacial basin.
Fig. 4. Variation of δ13C and δ18O in glaciolacustrine sediments
of Joniðkëlis section. For lithological legend, see Fig. 2.
84
A. Gaigalas et al.
Palaeogeographical changes are reflected in an el-
ementary sedimentation cycle by the alternation of dif-
ferent deposits (from the bottom to the top): glacial –
glaciolacustrine – lacustrine – glaciolacustrine. The com-
position of stable isotopes, δ13C and δ18O values, reflect
the climatic fluctuations during glaciolacustrine – lacus-
trine – glaciolacustrine sedimentation of the South-
Lithuanian, Middle-Lithuanian and North-Lithuanian
Phasials of the Baltija (Pomeranian) Stadial of Nemunas
(Vistulian) Glacial. Climatic changes are related to gla-
cier recessions during the Daniglacial (16,000-13,000 BP)
in Lithuania.
REFERENCES
Gaigalas A., 1994: On palaeogeography of Late Pleistocene in the
Lithuania. In: Acta Universitatis Nicolai Copernici, Geografia
XXVII. Nauki Matematyczno-Przyrodnicze: 183-194.
Gaigalas A., 2000: Correlation of 14C and OSL dating of Late Pleis-
tocene deposits in Lithuania. Geochronometria 19: 7-12.
Gudelis V. and Mikaila V., 1960: The largest glacio-lacustrine ba-
sins of Lithuania and their significance for geochronology and
palaeogeography of the Late-Glacial period. Collectanea Acta
Geologica Lithuania: 251-269.
Kazakauskas V. and Gaigalas A., 2000: On the problem of sedi-
mentation in some large periglacial lakes in Lithuania (in
Lithuanian). Geologija 31, Vilnius: 66-78.
Ð ink û nas P. and Jurgaitis A., 1997: Lithogenetic aspects of
glacigenic sedimentation investigations (in Lithuanian).
Geologja 23, Vilnius: 99-105.
Raukas A., Âboltinš O. and Gaigalas A., 1993: Main outlines of ge-
ology. In: Pleistocene stratigraphy, ice marginal formation and
deglaciation of the Baltic States, Tallinn: 7-18.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially supported by grant No.
T-552 from the Lithuania State Science and Studies Foun-
dation.
85
Stable isotopes as record of climatic changes...
86
